README.md, before:

# AVAL
Aval is a remote command executor targeting systems that can be provisioned on Torizon Cloud.

More specifically, Aval is used to initialize remote testing frameworks such as bats-core inside a given target and receive back one or more `report.xml` junit files, aka test results.

Aval is meant to be used either locally or from a CI pipeline.

## Usage

Copied straight from `python3 main.py --help`.

```
usage: main.py [-h] [--copy-artifact remote-path [local-output ...]] [--before BEFORE] [--delegation-config DELEGATION_CONFIG] [--device-config DEVICE_CONFIG]
               [--run-before-on-host RUN_BEFORE_ON_HOST] [--pid-map PID_MAP] [--ignore-different-secondaries-between-updates] [--do-not-update] [--remove-databases]
               [command]

Run commands on remote devices provisioned on Torizon Cloud.

positional arguments:
  command               Command to run on target device.

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --copy-artifact remote-path [local-output ...]
                        Copies multiple files over Remote Access from the target device to local-output. Specify pairs of remote-path and local-output.
  --before BEFORE       Command to run immediately before the main command on target device, after the update
  --delegation-config DELEGATION_CONFIG
                        Path of config which tells Aval how to parse the target delegation.
  --device-config DEVICE_CONFIG
                        Path of config which tells Aval which device to match.
  --run-before-on-host RUN_BEFORE_ON_HOST
                        Command to be executed on host (the machine calling aval) after locking and updating the device.
  --pid-map PID_MAP     Path of a PID4 map yaml file describing devices and their properties. By default it tries to use a `pid_map.yaml` located in the directory where Aval is called
                        from.
  --ignore-different-secondaries-between-updates
                        Enable workaround for update paths with conflicting secondaries
  --do-not-update       Instructs Aval to not update the board to the latest specified release. Uses whatever is installed in the device.
  --remove-databases    Deletes databases to work around Aktualizr bug. Use this if your test involves updating the device (e.g. TCB deploy).

```

## Network Information

Network information is always written to a file on the local folder called `device_information.json`. When used in combination with `--run-before-on-host`, this provides an alternative way to connect to the device from a script on the host computer using the data from the json network information file.

This allows integration with tests being run outside of the scope of Aval, such as integration tests between a host computer and the board. Note that you'll need to handle the SSH session on your own on this case.

This option mainly exists to use Aval for the TCB/IDE tests.

## Example

An example can be found in the `meta-e2e-tests` folder.

We have our test payload (a container built from `meta-e2e-tests/Dockerfile`) that includes the bats-core framework. Test suites can be included in `example/suites` and for now we provide `example/suites/meta`, which contains two tests: one passing and another failing.

`meta-e2e-tests/run-tests.sh` is a bash script that invokes the suite and returns a `report.xml` in the `/home/torizon` folder inside the container, which will be a shared volume with the hosts (that's how Aval gets the junit xml back).

One interesting aspect is that Aval uses `fabric`, which echoes back the test runs, so one has real-time information about the test run.

For more information check the `main.py` file and `.gitlab-ci.yml`.

## Developing 

First, fill in the information from the provided `.env.template` into a new `.env` file.

The easiest way to develop is setting up a mountpoint inside the Python container like so

```
$ docker run -it -v $(pwd):/aval --workdir=/aval python:3.12 bash
# make install
# make test
# make format
```

To run a test (echo Hello) on a provisioned Apalis iMX8 QuadMax
```
# eval $(cat .env) && SOC_UDT="apalis-imx8qm" python main.py --delegation-config delegation_config.toml "echo Hello"
```

If you want to run it outside of a container, you *must* ensure that you're using Python 3.12 instead of 3.13.

With `brew` you should run the following:

```
$ brew install python@3.12
$ python3.12 -m venv venv
$ source venv/bin/activate
$ make install
$ make test
$ make format
```

If you want to run natively in shell:

```
$ python3 -m venv venv
$ source venv/bin/activate
$ make install
$ eval $(cat .env) && SOC_UDT="apalis-imx8qm" python main.py --delegation-config delegation_config.toml "echo Hello"
```

If you want to run natively in Windows:

First, fill in the information from the provided `.env_template.ps1` into a new `.env.ps1` file.

```
$ python -m venv venv
$ .\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
$ . .\.env.ps1; $env:SOC_UDT = "apalis-imx8qm"; python main.py --delegation-config delegation_config.toml "echo Hello"
```

## Aval's Database

Aval uses Postgres as a locking mechanism. In the future we may also opt to use it to gather testing statistics.

The idea behind it is exploiting transaction atomicity for database operations, abusing it as a lock.

## Using it in CI

We have end-to-end tests that mimic exactly how you should run this in CI. Please take a look at the `.gitlab-ci.yml` and `.e2e-tests.yml` files.

Note: if you're using RAC for remote access (`USE_RAC=true`), you must have the IP of the CI runner whitelisted on Torizon Cloud, under Remote Access settings, otherwise the IP will be soft-banned and automatically return a 400 error when opening a new session.

## Property-based Filtering

Aval can filter by SoC properties such as if it has a VPU, NPU or any other peripheral. The basic idea is we describe the features we want when issuing a test
through a toml file (see [the a description of Verdin iMX8 with NPU](./verdin-imx8mpq-npu.toml)) and Aval holds a source-of-truth based on the PID4 (Product ID)
for a every possible board (see the [pid_mal.yaml file](./pid_map.yaml)). Aval will then automatically match properties and match against a provisioned
device with those properties by its PID4 stored in the `notes` field of Torizon Cloud.

For an example, check the [e2e-tests](./e2e-tests.yml) file. Currently supported properties can be examined in the [pid_mal.yaml file](./pid_map.yaml).

## Architecture-based Filtering

If you don't care for a particular device, invoking Aval with just a `SOC_ARCHITECTURE=<arm|arm64|...>` will simply lock
the first device of that architecture.

Note that setting `SOC_ARCHITECTURE` will make Aval ignore `SOC_UDT` and `--device-config`.

## Device Information

For each locked device, Aval will output a `device_information.json` file to the current directory. The workflow here
is that one can use this information together with `--run-before-on-host` to execute scripts that already manage an
SSH connection and "bypass" Aval, utilizing it solely as a board manager. An example of such script can be found in
the [host_command.sh file](./host_command.sh) and the flag usage can be observed in the [e2e-tests](.e2e-tests.yml) file.

## Environment Variables Glossary

- POSTGRES_DB: name of the Postgres database to hold fleet information.
- POSTGRES_HOST: host address (ip or hostname) to connect to the database.
- POSTGRES_PORT: port to connect to the database.
- POSTGRES_USER: user to login to the database.
- POSTGRES_PASSWORD: user password to login to the database.
- TORIZON_API_CLIENT_ID/TORIZON_API_SECRET_ID: Torizon Cloud Credentials. See [How to Use Torizon Cloud API](https://developer.toradex.com/torizon/torizon-platform/torizon-api/#how-to-use-torizon-cloud-api) 
- PUBLIC_KEY/PRIVATE_KEY: Public Key to be used in conjunction with `USE_RAC`
- DEVICE_PASSWORD: The actual `torizon` user password for Torizon OS. Note that all devices must have the same password.
- AVAL_VERBOSE: Makes Aval output all debug information.
- USE_RAC: Instead of standard SSH, use RAC to get an SSH connection. Allows plugging devices from anywhere.
- TARGET_BUILD_TYPE: `release` or `nightly`, referring to Torizon OS nightly or quarterly (release) builds.
- SOC_UDT: Device to be used for the current test. Allowed names are keys in the [PID4 Map file](./pid_map.yaml).
- SOC_ARCHITECTURE: Architecture of Device to be used for current test. If `SOC_ARCHITECTURE` is set, it will ignore both `SOC_UDT` and `--device-config` and lock the first device of a given architecture. Allowed architectures can be found as values for the `architecture` key under each `SOC_UDT` name in the [PID4 Map file](./pid_map.yaml).
- TEST_WHOLE_FLEET: If `TEST_WHOLE_FLEET` is set, ignores `SOC_ARCHITECTURE`, `SOC_UDT` and `--device-config`.

## Contributing

`TODO`s and `FIXME`s are probably scattered around the code, please grep for that.

## Credits

The core classes of Aval are based off Eduardo's A/B to Torizon OS migration script, albeit with significant changes.

The hardware setup that Aval is developed upon and used to run hundreds of tests each day was created by Lucas Bernardes, with 3D models available for download [here](https://github.com/torizon/modular-rack-toradex).

Commit message:

device_handler: add 'hacking-session' flag for interactive SSH terminal
This commit introduces a new command-line option `--hacking-session` that allows
users to open an interactive SSH session on a device for debugging purposes.
When this flag is enabled, Aval connects to each device and launches an
interactive shell, letting the user manually inspect, test, or run commands
directly on the device.

Also, this commit adds unit tests for this new feature.

Related-to: AVAL-74
Signed-off-by: Lucas Bernardes <lucas.bernardes@toradex.com>

README.md, after:

# AVAL
Aval is a remote command executor targeting systems that can be provisioned on Torizon Cloud.

More specifically, Aval is used to initialize remote testing frameworks such as bats-core inside a given target and receive back one or more `report.xml` junit files, aka test results.

Aval is meant to be used either locally or from a CI pipeline.

## Usage

Copied straight from `python3 main.py --help`.

```
usage: main.py [-h] [--copy-artifact remote-path [local-output ...]] [--before BEFORE] [--delegation-config DELEGATION_CONFIG] [--device-config DEVICE_CONFIG] [--run-before-on-host RUN_BEFORE_ON_HOST] [--pid-map PID_MAP]
               [--ignore-different-secondaries-between-updates] [--do-not-update] [--remove-databases] [--hacking-session]
               [command]

Run commands on remote devices provisioned on Torizon Cloud.

positional arguments:
  command               Command to run on target device.

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --copy-artifact remote-path [local-output ...]
                        Copies multiple files over Remote Access from the target device to local-output. Specify pairs of remote-path and local-output.
  --before BEFORE       Command to run immediately before the main command on target device, after the update
  --delegation-config DELEGATION_CONFIG
                        Path of config which tells Aval how to parse the target delegation.
  --device-config DEVICE_CONFIG
                        Path of config which tells Aval which device to match.
  --run-before-on-host RUN_BEFORE_ON_HOST
                        Command to be executed on host (the machine calling aval) after locking and updating the device.
  --pid-map PID_MAP     Path of a PID4 map yaml file describing devices and their properties. By default it tries to use a `pid_map.yaml` located in the directory where Aval is called
                        from.
  --ignore-different-secondaries-between-updates
                        Enable workaround for update paths with conflicting secondaries
  --do-not-update       Instructs Aval to not update the board to the latest specified release. Uses whatever is installed in the device.
  --remove-databases    Deletes databases to work around Aktualizr bug. Use this if your test involves updating the device (e.g. TCB deploy).
  --hacking-session     Opens an interactive terminal that can be used for debugging.
```

## Network Information

Network information is always written to a file on the local folder called `device_information.json`. When used in combination with `--run-before-on-host`, this provides an alternative way to connect to the device from a script on the host computer using the data from the json network information file.

This allows integration with tests being run outside of the scope of Aval, such as integration tests between a host computer and the board. Note that you'll need to handle the SSH session on your own on this case.

This option mainly exists to use Aval for the TCB/IDE tests.

## Example

An example can be found in the `meta-e2e-tests` folder.

We have our test payload (a container built from `meta-e2e-tests/Dockerfile`) that includes the bats-core framework. Test suites can be included in `example/suites` and for now we provide `example/suites/meta`, which contains two tests: one passing and another failing.

`meta-e2e-tests/run-tests.sh` is a bash script that invokes the suite and returns a `report.xml` in the `/home/torizon` folder inside the container, which will be a shared volume with the hosts (that's how Aval gets the junit xml back).

One interesting aspect is that Aval uses `fabric`, which echoes back the test runs, so one has real-time information about the test run.

For more information check the `main.py` file and `.gitlab-ci.yml`.

## Developing 

First, fill in the information from the provided `.env.template` into a new `.env` file.

The easiest way to develop is setting up a mountpoint inside the Python container like so

```
$ docker run -it -v $(pwd):/aval --workdir=/aval python:3.12 bash
# make install
# make test
# make format
```

To run a test (echo Hello) on a provisioned Apalis iMX8 QuadMax
```
# eval $(cat .env) && SOC_UDT="apalis-imx8qm" python main.py --delegation-config delegation_config.toml "echo Hello"
```

If you want to run it outside of a container, you *must* ensure that you're using Python 3.12 instead of 3.13.

With `brew` you should run the following:

```
$ brew install python@3.12
$ python3.12 -m venv venv
$ source venv/bin/activate
$ make install
$ make test
$ make format
```

If you want to run natively in shell:

```
$ python3 -m venv venv
$ source venv/bin/activate
$ make install
$ eval $(cat .env) && SOC_UDT="apalis-imx8qm" python main.py --delegation-config delegation_config.toml "echo Hello"
```

If you want to run natively in Windows:

First, fill in the information from the provided `.env_template.ps1` into a new `.env.ps1` file.

```
$ python -m venv venv
$ .\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
$ . .\.env.ps1; $env:SOC_UDT = "apalis-imx8qm"; python main.py --delegation-config delegation_config.toml "echo Hello"
```

## Aval's Database

Aval uses Postgres as a locking mechanism. In the future we may also opt to use it to gather testing statistics.

The idea behind it is exploiting transaction atomicity for database operations, abusing it as a lock.

## Using it in CI

We have end-to-end tests that mimic exactly how you should run this in CI. Please take a look at the `.gitlab-ci.yml` and `.e2e-tests.yml` files.

Note: if you're using RAC for remote access (`USE_RAC=true`), you must have the IP of the CI runner whitelisted on Torizon Cloud, under Remote Access settings, otherwise the IP will be soft-banned and automatically return a 400 error when opening a new session.

## Property-based Filtering

Aval can filter by SoC properties such as if it has a VPU, NPU or any other peripheral. The basic idea is we describe the features we want when issuing a test
through a toml file (see [the a description of Verdin iMX8 with NPU](./verdin-imx8mpq-npu.toml)) and Aval holds a source-of-truth based on the PID4 (Product ID)
for a every possible board (see the [pid_mal.yaml file](./pid_map.yaml)). Aval will then automatically match properties and match against a provisioned
device with those properties by its PID4 stored in the `notes` field of Torizon Cloud.

For an example, check the [e2e-tests](./e2e-tests.yml) file. Currently supported properties can be examined in the [pid_mal.yaml file](./pid_map.yaml).

## Architecture-based Filtering

If you don't care for a particular device, invoking Aval with just a `SOC_ARCHITECTURE=<arm|arm64|...>` will simply lock
the first device of that architecture.

Note that setting `SOC_ARCHITECTURE` will make Aval ignore `SOC_UDT` and `--device-config`.

## Device Information

For each locked device, Aval will output a `device_information.json` file to the current directory. The workflow here
is that one can use this information together with `--run-before-on-host` to execute scripts that already manage an
SSH connection and "bypass" Aval, utilizing it solely as a board manager. An example of such script can be found in
the [host_command.sh file](./host_command.sh) and the flag usage can be observed in the [e2e-tests](.e2e-tests.yml) file.

## Environment Variables Glossary

- POSTGRES_DB: name of the Postgres database to hold fleet information.
- POSTGRES_HOST: host address (ip or hostname) to connect to the database.
- POSTGRES_PORT: port to connect to the database.
- POSTGRES_USER: user to login to the database.
- POSTGRES_PASSWORD: user password to login to the database.
- TORIZON_API_CLIENT_ID/TORIZON_API_SECRET_ID: Torizon Cloud Credentials. See [How to Use Torizon Cloud API](https://developer.toradex.com/torizon/torizon-platform/torizon-api/#how-to-use-torizon-cloud-api) 
- PUBLIC_KEY/PRIVATE_KEY: Public Key to be used in conjunction with `USE_RAC`
- DEVICE_PASSWORD: The actual `torizon` user password for Torizon OS. Note that all devices must have the same password.
- AVAL_VERBOSE: Makes Aval output all debug information.
- USE_RAC: Instead of standard SSH, use RAC to get an SSH connection. Allows plugging devices from anywhere.
- TARGET_BUILD_TYPE: `release` or `nightly`, referring to Torizon OS nightly or quarterly (release) builds.
- SOC_UDT: Device to be used for the current test. Allowed names are keys in the [PID4 Map file](./pid_map.yaml).
- SOC_ARCHITECTURE: Architecture of Device to be used for current test. If `SOC_ARCHITECTURE` is set, it will ignore both `SOC_UDT` and `--device-config` and lock the first device of a given architecture. Allowed architectures can be found as values for the `architecture` key under each `SOC_UDT` name in the [PID4 Map file](./pid_map.yaml).
- TEST_WHOLE_FLEET: If `TEST_WHOLE_FLEET` is set, ignores `SOC_ARCHITECTURE`, `SOC_UDT` and `--device-config`.

## Contributing

`TODO`s and `FIXME`s are probably scattered around the code, please grep for that.

## Credits

The core classes of Aval are based off Eduardo's A/B to Torizon OS migration script, albeit with significant changes.

The hardware setup that Aval is developed upon and used to run hundreds of tests each day was created by Lucas Bernardes, with 3D models available for download [here](https://github.com/torizon/modular-rack-toradex).
